[Applause]
when I first began recording wild
soundscapes 45 years ago I had no idea
that ants insect larvae sea anemones and
viruses created a sound signature but
they do and so does every wild habitat
on the planet like the Amazon rainforest
you're hearing behind me in fact
temperate and tropical rainforests each
produce of vibrant animal Orchestra that
instantaneous and organized expression
of insects reptiles amphibians birds and
mammals in every soundscape that springs
from a wild habitat generates its own
unique signature one that contains
incredible amounts of information and
that some of that information I want to
share with you today the soundscape is
made up of three basic sources the first
is the geophone E or the non-biological
sounds that occur in any given habitat
like wind in the trees water in a stream
waves at the ocean shore movement of the
earth the second of these is the
biophony and the biophony is all of the
sound that's generated by organisms in a
given habitat at one time and in one
place and the third is all of the sound
that we humans generate that's called
anthrophony some of it is controlled
like music or theater but most of it is
chaotic and incoherent which some of us
refer to as noise there was a time when
I considered wild sound escapes to be a
worthless artifact they were just there
but they had no significance well I was
wrong what I learned from these
encounters was the careful listening
gives us incredibly valuable tools by
which to evaluate the health of a
habitat across the entire spectrum of
life when I began recording in the
late 60s the typical methods of
recording were limited to the fragmented
capture of individual species like birds
mostly in the beginning but later
animals like mammals and and amphibians
to me this was a little like trying to
understand the magnificence of
Beethoven's fifth symphony by
abstracting the sound of a single violin
player out of the context of the
orchestra and hearing just at one part
fortunately more and more institutions
are implementing the more holistic
models that I and a few of my colleagues
have introduced to the field of
soundscape ecology when I began
recording for over four decades ago I
could record for 10 hours and capture
one hour of usable material good enough
for an album or a film soundtrack or a
museum installation now because of
global warming resource extraction and
human noise among many other factors it
can take up to a thousand hours or more
to capture the same thing fully 50% of
my archive comes from habitats so
radically altered that they're either
altogether silent or could no longer be
heard in any of their original form the
usual methods of evaluating a habitat
have been done by visually counting the
numbers of species and the numbers of
individuals within each species in a
given area however by comparing data
that ties together both density and
diversity from what we hear I'm able to
arrive at much more precise Fitness
outcomes and I want to show you some
examples that typify the possibilities
unlocked by diving into this universe
this is Lincoln medal Lincoln Meadows a
three and a half hour drive east of San
Francisco and the Sierra Nevada
mountains at about 2000 meters altitude
and I've been recording there for many
years in 1988 a logging company
convinced local residents that there'd
be absolutely no environment
impact from a new method they were
trying called selective logging taking
out a tree here and there rather than
clear cutting a whole area with
permission granted to record both before
and after the operation I set up my gear
and captured a large number of dawn
choruses to very strict protocol and
calibrated recordings because I wanted a
really good baseline and this is an
example of a spectrogram spectrogram as
a graphic illustration of sound with
time from left to right across the page
15 seconds in this case is represented
and frequency from the bottom of the
page to the top lowest to highest and
you can see that the signature of a
stream is represented here in the bottom
third or half of the page while birds
that were once in that meadow are
represented in the signature across the
top there are a lot of them and here's
Lincoln meadow before selective logging
well a year later I returned and using
the same protocols and recording under
the same conditions I recorded a number
of examples and same dawn choruses and
now this is what we've got this is after
selective logging you can see that the
stream is still represented in the
bottom third of the page but notice
what's missing in the top two-thirds
[Applause]
and coming up is the sound of a
woodpecker well I've returned to Lincoln
meadow 15 times in the last 25 years and
I can tell you that the biophony the
density and diversity of that biophony
has not yet returned to anything like it
was before the operation but here's a
picture of Lincoln meadow taken after
and you can see that from the
perspective of the camera or the human
eye hardly a stick or a tree appears to
be out of place which would confirm the
logging company's contention that
there's nothing of environmental impact
however our ears tell us a very
different story young students are
always asking me what these animals are
saying and really I've got no idea but I
can but I can't tell you that they do
express themselves
whether or not we understand it as a
different story I was walking along the
shore in Alaska and I came across this
tide pool filled with a colony of sea
anemones these wonderful eating machines
relatives of coral and jellyfish and
curious to see if any of them made any
noise I dropped a hydrophone an
underwater microphone covered in rubber
down the mouth part and immediately the
critter began to absorb the microphone
into its belly and the tentacles were
searching out the surface for something
of nutritional value the static like
sounds that are very low that you're
going to hear right now
yeah but watch when it didn't find
anything to eat
I think that's an expression that we
understood in any language at the end of
its breeding cycle the Great Basin
spadefoot toad digs itself down about a
meter under the heart pan desert soil of
the American West where it can stay for
many seasons until conditions are just
right for it to emerge again and when
there's enough moisture in the soil in
the spring frogs will dig themselves to
the surface and gather around these
large vernal pools in great numbers and
they vocalize in a in a chorus
that's absolutely in sync with one
another and they do that for two reasons
the first is competitive because they're
looking for mates and the second is
cooperative because if they're all
vocalizing in sync together it makes it
really difficult for predators like
coyotes foxes and owls to single out any
individual for a meal this is a
spectrogram of what the Frog chorusing
looks like when it's in a very healthy
pattern
Mono Lake is just the east of Yosemite
National Park in California and it's a
favorite habitat of these toads and it's
also favored by US Navy jet pilots who
train in their fighters flying them at
speeds exceeding 1,100 kilometers an
hour and altitudes only a couple of
hundred meters above ground level of
lamagno Basin very fast very low and so
loud that the anthrophony the human
noise even though it's six and a half
kilometers from the frog pond you just
heard a second ago it masked the sound
of the coursing toads you can see in
this spectrogram that all of the energy
that was once in the first spectrogram
has gone in the top end of the spectrum
and that there's breaks in the coursing
at two and a half four and a half and
six and a half seconds and then the
sound of the jet the signature is in
yellow at the very bottom of the page
now at the end of that flyby it took the
frogs fully 45 minutes to regain their
coursing synchronicity during which time
and under a full moon we watched as two
coyotes and a great horned owl came in
to pick off a few of their numbers the
good news is that with a little bit of
habitat restoration and fewer flights
the frog populations once diminishing
during the 1980s and early 90s have
pretty much returned to normal I want to
end with a story told by a beaver it's a
very sad story but it really illustrates
how animals can sometimes show emotion a
very controversial subject among some
older biologists a colleague of mine was
recording in the American Midwest around
this pond that had been formed maybe
16,000 years ago at the end of the last
ice age it was also formed in part by a
beaver dam at one end that held that
whole ecosystem together in a very
delicate balance and one afternoon while
he was recording there suddenly appeared
from out of nowhere a couple of game
wardens who for no apparent reason
walked over to the Beaver Dam dropped a
stick of dynamite down it blowing it up
killing the female and her young babies
horrified my colleague remained behind
to gather his thoughts and to record
whatever he could the rest of the
afternoon and that evening he captured a
remarkable event the lone surviving male
beavers swimming in slow circles crying
out inconsolably for its lost mate and
offspring this is probably the saddest
sound I've ever heard coming from any
organism human or other
[Music]
yeah well there are many facets to
soundscapes among them the ways in which
animals taught us to dance and sing
which I'll say for another time but you
have heard how biophony z' helped
clarify our understanding of the natural
world you've heard the impact of
resource extraction human noise and
habitat destruction and where
environmental sciences have typically
tried to understand the world from what
we see a much fuller understanding can
be got from what we hear by often ease
and Giovanni's are the signature voices
of the natural world and as we hear them
were endowed with a sense of place the
true story of the world we live in in a
matter of seconds a soundscape reveals
much more information from many
perspectives from quantifiable data the
cultural inspiration visual capture
implicitly frames a limited frontal
perspective of a given spatial context
while soundscapes widen that scope to a
full 360 degrees completely enveloping
us and while a picture may be worth a
thousand words a soundscape is worth a
thousand pictures and our ears tell us
that the whisper of every leaf and
creature speaks to the natural sources
of our lives which indeed may hold the
secrets of love for all things
especially our own humanity and the last
word goes to a Jaguar from the Amazon
[Music]
thank you for listening
[Applause]
[Music]